Good morning, everyone. I'm Charlie Gao. I'm author of Mirai, an asynchronous evaluation framework for R.
I'm really glad to be joined here by Will Landau. He's not quite on stage, but will be.
Will Landau is the author of Target and also the author of Crew, which extends Mirai to high
performance computing. We'd also like to think that we're joined in spirit at least by this guy,
Zhou Cheng, creator of Shiny. You'll notice he's not on stage because he's at this moment on
another stage talking about some other little project that he's been working on, something
about bringing Shiny to Python. So it will be down to me to do the big reveal on another little
project that we, all three of us, have been working on collaboratively, just a little something to
advance the state of async for R and R Shiny. And after I'm done with my part of the presentation,
Will is going to highlight some of the important scientific work that all of this is supporting.
So going back to the title of the presentation, what do we actually mean when we say next-generation
async? Or what do we mean by async in the first place? Well, let me give you a very simple
definition, which is if we say that parallelism is the ability to do multiple things at once,
then async is just not waiting around while that's happening.
Now, this definition, this concept isn't very controversial in a lot of other programming
languages. So even if you've never programmed in Rust or Go or JavaScript, you might have heard
that async generally works very well in those contexts. And I just want to leave you with one
takeaway here. Most modern websites have some JavaScript in them. So if you open a web page,
perhaps on your mobile, and you click a button, you generally expect it to just work. When you're
hitting that button, you're not likely to be wondering whether that thing is going to hang on
you. And that conveniently brings us to where we are now in R. So if I bring back this definition
of async, so we have this in mind, then I suggest that perhaps most of us are missing what I term a
first class async experience. And why do I say that? Well, I think for most of us, our typical
experience with parallelism is with the parallel package, which has been part of base R for over
20 years now. And that is simply parallel and not async. So you send tasks to a lot of parallel
workers, but you're waiting until they all happen, and then you collect the results at the end.
Of course, there are many other excellent packages, such as Polar, which is used for
local parallelism because it relies on writing and reading files from disk. But again, that's not
always async. If you create what are called persistent sessions, then if those sessions are
all busy doing jobs, you cannot send another job onto those sessions. And that actually is the
same thing with the future package, which also promises async. But again, simply if you have more
tasks than the number of workers, this will actually block your session. So what would it
actually take to bring first class async to R? Well, Nanomessage Next Generation, or NNG,
implements async in C. And this is async on a par with what I've mentioned before in Go and Rust,
etc. It's a very lightweight C library, and it implements a brokerless model. And by that,
I just mean there's no need for a central server anywhere. And Nanonext, the package, brings NNG
to R. And the nice logos you see at the top are just some context in industry where NNG is in use.
So coming now to Mirai, the star of the show, well, at least my part of the show.
And in case you're still wondering, Mirai is just simply Japanese for future.
And it's an async evaluation framework for R. Again, if I just bring back the definition of
async so we have this in mind, then Mirai uses Nanonext to deliver true first class async.
And what I mean by that is you can connect thousands of parallel processes
and launch millions of tasks all at once. So many more tasks than processes.
And because Mirai uses Nanonext, which is so lightweight, the response times to these
processes reduce right down from a millisecond to the microsecond range.
And for all you shiny and plumber developers out there, you'll have noticed by use of the
word responsiveness, and that's obviously something that you care a lot about. And to use
and to use async in either of those contexts, you use a promise or what's called a promising
object, which is easily converted into a promise. And the promise in this context is just the
availability of a value sometime in the future. So to date, to create these promises, you can,
you could use an actual future from the future package. But as we've seen, this will actually
block your session if you have more tasks than workers. You can use what's called a future
promise. This is actually implemented in the promises package. And this has always been
experimental. But even more importantly, for both of these solutions, they require constant polling
for whether this future value is available or not. And it looks something a bit like this.
And this is every 0.1 seconds checking, has this future result? Has it resolved? Has it resolved?
And you can imagine if your shiny app has quite a few of these promises around, then it might
look something like this. And you can sort of see that there's a lot going on. When in fact,
none of this is really necessary. And this is the next generation of promises. Because now Mirai
is a promising object. It has native support for shiny extended tasks and plumber.
And it's completely event driven. That means there's no need for any of this polling.
And because you're not waiting for the next time it polls, there's zero latency.
So now what we have is something that looks like this. And this is simply launching one million
promises all at once. And this is actually something you can try at home. But we're not
going to show you this here. Instead, we're going to show a somewhat simpler shiny app,
which does 10,000 coin flips asynchronously in parallel. And you can see on the left is the old
polling approach. And here, no matter how fast you poll, the update will always be discrete and
in chunks. Whereas on the right, you have the new Mirai promises and you can see it updating
almost continuously. So on this slide, I just have one last thing to say, which is what you're
seeing, rather, is not even Mirai. It's actually Cru, which does use the same Mirai promises
underneath. But who better to talk to you about Cru than Will Landau himself. So let me invite him
on stage. Thanks. I'm Will. I am a statistician and package developer. And I am Mirai's all time
biggest fan. It solves a problem that I and a lot of other people needed for years. And really glad
to join my friend and collaborator Charlie to talk about an extension to Mirai that I wrote
called Cru. To begin, I work in the life sciences and my group and I make decisions about what we
design clinical trials and we analyze clinical trials that make decisions about what we think
is our best educated information about whether a medical treatment works and is safe or it doesn't
work. And we throw at this all the advanced modeling we can because these are some of the
most important decisions that can be made with statistics. And those models take a long time to
run, potentially hours for a single model. And when we design the clinical trial, it gets even
more challenging because to design a trial, we often have to simulate it. And to simulate a trial,
we often need to run these models thousands of times. If you were to try this on your local
laptop, you would never get it done. We need entire armies of computers to do this. Armies
of computers that are working together on a cluster that's managed with a resource manager
like Slurm or Grid Engine or a cloud system or a service like Batch. And these systems are really
tricky to use. For the uninitiated, they're difficult to even access. And we get into
challenges of overhead and cost. And to give you an idea, if you request a virtual machine or a job
on one of these systems, you may be waiting several minutes, maybe even hours to actually
have that resource available to have it running for you. And so it's tempted to keep it running
because what if you need to submit work? But if it's idling and sitting there,
either if you're on your company's cluster, that might be occupying resources that other people
could be using. Or in the cloud, you risk racking up a huge bill. And this is where
CRU comes in. CRU is designed to navigate these kinds of tricky waters. So the solution to the
cost overhead trade-off that CRU provides is autoscaling. CRU plugs into high-performance
computing environments through the CRU cluster package or the CRU AWS Batch package or other
plugins to make it easier to access these systems. And thanks to Mirai, which does by far
the most difficult part of all of this, when we manage those tasks, the overhead is really low.
So how does all this work? So in CRU, there's this thing called a controller, which is an
interface that sits locally. And then there are workers, and each worker is an R process.
And these R processes could live on different computers on the local network, and they do one
or more tasks. Now, these workers need to get the instructions somehow. They need to know what to do,
and they need to be able to send results back. So there's got to be communication.
And this is exactly the challenge that Mirai automatically solves.
So the controller calls a function in Mirai that says, here are a bunch of WebSockets on
the local network. All you workers out there, come find me. And then each worker dials into
one of those WebSockets with another function in Mirai, and each worker accepts instructions,
does tasks, sends the results back. And so this way, Mirai doesn't care where the workers are,
but it manages the tasks, and CRU gets the workers up and running. One of the reasons I called it
CRU. And the degree that Mirai allows CRU to operate to accomplish this allows flexibility
for autoscaling. And to demonstrate, let's take this pipeline for simulation. This is a
directed acyclic graph like the one Shatish mentioned in the previous presentation.
And each of these tasks, from simulated datasets to models, is kind of like a unit of demand
for a worker. So if you have tasks to do, you require workers to do them. When CRU sees a
pipeline like this, one of the first things it does is it spins up the number of workers
required to accomplish the tasks that can be done. And so a worker starts. And if the task
load increases in the pipeline, if you can fan out and accomplish parallel tasks simultaneously,
then CRU will increase the number of workers to meet that demand.
When you proceed along the pipeline, CRU reuses the workers that may have been running previously,
but are just finishing up tasks. And that way you avoid the overhead of requesting
brand new resources. And when the workload subsides, demand decreases, some workers may
be sleeping on the job, doing nothing. And so to avoid the extra cost, we evict them from the team.
So this fluctuation in demand, it can happen any number of times over the course of a pipeline.
And CRU will scale up and scale down automatically.
And you can control that with settings when you create the controller. How many seconds do you
wait here? How many idle seconds do you wait before you terminate a worker? How many tasks
can a worker run before it retires? And this allows us a continuum between perfectly transient
workers that only run one task and exit, and fully persistent workers, on the other hand,
that keep running until there's no more work to do. This continuum between transient persistent
workers is something we've never had in R before. And with CRU, you can hit any point in the middle.
To manage tasks, this is, in some sense, the easier part. Because all the configuration
optimization details are part of the controller. At this point, CRU has standard verbs to submit
tasks, push. In push, you give it an expression in R, the data it needs, and it submits the task
to a worker. And the pop verb gets any results, gets the result of a task, if it's available.
And there are functional programming verbs like map and walk and collect to work with multiple
tasks at once. Like I mentioned before, CRU can plug into a lot of different high-performance
computing systems. Slurm and Grid Engine are a couple examples, but also AWS Batch. And in
addition to the settings I described earlier, it's just a matter of plugging in the configuration
details for how you want to access Batch, your job definition, job queue. Networking may be a
little tricky, but that's at the platform level. And happy to talk about that afterwards.
CRU is also designed for you to be able to write your own plugins. If you know how to launch a
worker or terminate one in your system, then you can write one of your own. And CRU is designed
for users to be able to do this. And there's a whole package vignette that describes it.
Now, as Charlie mentions, a lot of this enables really cool stuff to be done with Shiny.
And so far, I've only been talking about parallel computing, but async computing is equally
possible. So this controller push method returns a MiraiPromise. And, well, it returns a MiraiTask
object that automatically becomes a promise when it needs to. And these promises can be
these promises automatically invalidate Shiny reactive expressions as soon as the promise is
resolved. And you get really responsive apps. Every time this text is changing on the screen
is a promise resolving and triggering an update. This can happen really fast. And it unblocks
the current app session when this happens. So even if you're running a single app session,
or if you're running multiple app sessions for a single app, regardless,
you see really high responsiveness like this. Up to this point, I've only I haven't even
mentioned Targets. And Targets is really the tool I designed CRU to support. It's the primary use
case. And the previous talk mentioned pipelines arranged in a directed acyclic graph. That's
exactly the contribution of Targets. And all you need to do to use CRU and all the distributed
computing and parallel computing is to supply a controller. And the rest Targets takes care of.
And there is a whole vignette on that as well. To recap, Mirai is this fantastic,
blindingly fast parallel package with first class async that we have needed for a long time.
And CRU tries to take this to the next level by plugging it into high performance computing
systems where people doing scientific work need Mirai the most. Thanks very much.
Well, thank you both. That's incredible. You have my mind racing on a bunch of different
ways I want to apply it into my normal day to day. So we have time for maybe just one or two
questions from the Slido. Are there any hardware requirements for Mirai and CRU?
Not that I can think of. It supports R3.6 and onwards.
And for CRU, it really depends on the plugin. So if you want to use it locally, there's a local
controller. And if you use a plugin for, let's say, Slurm, then you'll need access to the Slurm.
But that's very situation specific. Thanks. And we'll do one last.
What thoughts do you have about Coro and async await?
So Mirai supports Coro. You can use it instead of the teacher or any other asynchronous
function. Plugs well into Coro. I've tested it with Neonel, the author of Coro. And yeah,
it's just you can use Coro to write a more succinct code than if you were to chain
promises. A good way to use Mirai. Thank you both.
Thank you.